docs: What's New & Upgrade Guide 10.0 (#64927)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/whatsnew/whats-new-in-v10-0.md

## Correlations

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

You can now bring context from multiple data sources into the Explore experience. Correlations is an extension of our existing Data Links functionality and now enables you to link from any data source, to any data source.

Correlations enable you to seamlessly jump from one data source to another. You define relationships between your different data sources, and when Exploring simply click a button next to a related field in one data source and Grafana will run the corresponding query in the other datasource.

It's worth noting that Correlations is currently in preview. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

To try out Correlations, you'll need to enable the `correlations` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for Correlations, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

## First panel creation flow

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

> Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data.
> 
> The new panel creation flow greatly simplifies the data source selection step. It provides a clear overview of your available data sources and a direct link to connecting a new one, the first time you add a panel to your dashboard.
> 
> To try it out, you'll need to enable the `datasourceOnboarding` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data.

With the new flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing users to quickly connect to a new one when needed. Additionally, the flow now enables quick uploading of CSV files and access to built-in data sources.

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `datasourceOnboarding` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.
```

Adding @thanos-karachalios suggestion

> 

Reviewer: Here is the presentation for the new Data source picker. 

```suggestion
## Introducing an Enhanced Data Source Selection Experience: Simplifying Querying for Users

Our latest advancements streamline the process of selecting the ideal data source in Grafana, prioritizing recent usage and providing labels and supplementary descriptions. The enhanced data source picker includes contextual information and the ability to upload CSV files directly, and an advanced mode with built-in sources and the option to add a new one.

These updates enhance the querying experience on our platform, making it easier for users to find the desired data source.

```

## Public dashboards

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Public dashboards allow you to share your Grafana dashboard with anyone without them having to log into Grafana. This is useful when you want to expose your dashboard to the world.

These are some of the improvements you will find in this version:

- The time picker and annotations can be toggled on or off from the configuration modal
- You can see all the public dashboards from the Dashboards menu
- Improved UI: new modal design, paused, and not found pages
- Bug fixes! E.g collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/dashboard-public/?pg=blog&plcmt=body-txt).

## Public dashboards insights

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

> The public dashboards insights provide valuable information about your dashboard usage. You can easily access and view important metrics such as the daily query count, the number of views in the last 30 days, and the number of errors in the last 30 days.

Reviewer 2: shouldn't we say "public dashboard usage"
```suggestion
The public dashboards insights provide valuable information about your public dashboard usage. You can easily access and view important metrics such as the daily query count, the number of views in the last 30 days, and the number of errors in the last 30 days.
```

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

## Email sharing for public dashboards

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

Our email sharing feature allows you to easily share your public dashboards with specific individuals. By adding their email addresses, they will receive a one-time valid link to access the dashboard for 30 days. This provides you with greater control over who can visualize your data.

> To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboardsEmailSharing` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Reviewer 2: I think we should also mention the `publicDashboards` feature toggle, right?

---
description: Feature and improvement highlights for Grafana v10.0
keywords:
  - grafana
  - new
  - documentation
  - '10.0'
  - release notes
title: What's new in Grafana v10.0
weight: -33
---

# What’s new in Grafana v10.0

Welcome to Grafana 10.0! Read on to learn about changes to search and navigation, dashboards and visualizations, and authentication and security. For even more detail about all the changes in this release, refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

<!-- Template below
## Feature
[Generally available | Available in experimental/beta] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise, Cloud Free, Cloud Pro, Cloud Advanced]
Description. Include an overview of the feature and problem it solves, and where to learn more (like a link to the docs).
> **Note:** You must use relative references when linking to docs within the Grafana repo. Please do not use absolute URLs. For more information about relrefs, refer to [Links and references](/docs/writers-toolkit/writing-guide/references/).-->

## Authentication and authorization

### Role-based access control is always enabled

> 

Author: @vtorosyan - Should there be a feature availability note (e.g., _Generally available in all editions of Grafana_)

Author: Ahhh okay, I understand. Will review your PR.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for Correlations, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

## Enhanced Data Source Selection Experience: Simplifying Querying for Users

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data. Our latest advancements streamline the process of selecting the ideal data source in Grafana, prioritizing recent usage and providing labels and supplementary descriptions.

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing users to quickly connect to a new one when needed. Additionally, the flow now enables quick uploading of CSV files and access to built-in data sources.

<!--
- TODO:Add screenshots
-->

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `advancedDataSourcePicker` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

> ## Public dashboards

Author: ```suggestion
## Dashboards and visualizations

### Public dashboards
```

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Public dashboards allow you to share your Grafana dashboard with anyone without them having to log into Grafana. This is useful when you want to expose your dashboard to the world.

These are some of the improvements you will find in this version:

- The time picker and annotations can be toggled on or off from the configuration modal
- You can see all the public dashboards from the Dashboards menu
- Improved UI: new modal design, paused, and not found pages
- Bug fixes! E.g collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/dashboard-public/?pg=blog&plcmt=body-txt).

> ## Public dashboards insights

Author: ```suggestion
### Public dashboards insights
```

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for Correlations, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

## Enhanced Data Source Selection Experience: Simplifying Querying for Users

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data. Our latest advancements streamline the process of selecting the ideal data source in Grafana, prioritizing recent usage and providing labels and supplementary descriptions.

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing users to quickly connect to a new one when needed. Additionally, the flow now enables quick uploading of CSV files and access to built-in data sources.

<!--
- TODO:Add screenshots
-->

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `advancedDataSourcePicker` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

## Dashboards and visualizations

### Public dashboards

> _Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

Author: ```suggestion
_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

```

> Public dashboards allow you to share your Grafana dashboard with anyone without them having to log into Grafana. This is useful when you want to expose your dashboard to the world.

Author: Is it okay not to use "expose" here? The rest of the sentence seems pretty casual and "expose" seems like quite a technical term.
```suggestion
Public dashboards allow you to share your Grafana dashboard with anyone without requiring them to log in to Grafana. This is useful when you want to make your dashboard available to the world.
```

Reviewer 3: Oops, I hadn't seen ehe comment. Looks good to me! Thanks @imatwawana :)

These are some of the improvements you will find in this version:

- The time picker and annotations can be toggled on or off from the configuration modal
- You can see all the public dashboards from the Dashboards menu

> - Improved UI: new modal design, paused, and not found pages

Reviewer 2: It's paused and not found pages. Both (paused and not found) are two new different pages

> - Bug fixes! E.g collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels

Author: It's not clear whether we're describing the bug or the fix here. Can we clarify
```suggestion
- Bug fixes! E.g collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels
```

Reviewer 3: Fair enough. @juanicabanas @evictorero could we add some more details about what that means?

Reviewer 4: Panels inside collapsed rows, panels with hidden queries and zoom-in on panels were not working on public dashboards. Maybe we can change the "Bug fixes" to "Added support for..."?

Author: That works for me!

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

> To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/dashboard-public/?pg=blog&plcmt=body-txt).

Author: We should be using relrefs rather than absolute links so that they always resolve no matter what version we point to
```suggestion
To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation]({{< relref "../../dashboards/dashboard-public" >}}).
```

### Public dashboards insights

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

The public dashboards insights provide valuable information about your public dashboard usage. You can easily access and view important metrics such as the daily query count, the number of views in the last 30 days, and the number of errors in the last 30 days.

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

### Email sharing for public dashboards

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

Our email sharing feature allows you to easily share your public dashboards with specific individuals. By adding their email addresses, they will receive a one-time valid link to access the dashboard. This provides you with greater control over who can visualize your data.

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboardsEmailSharing` and `publicDashboards` feature toggles. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

### Datagrid

We introduced a new panel, which allows users to edit their data within a Grafana dashboard: The Datagrid
The Datagrid is a new beta panel that allows users to edit their data within a Grafana dashboard. Imagine having a spreadsheet-like view where you can fine-tune data pulled from a datasource or create your own dataset from scratch and use it within your dashboard to update your panels in real time.

In combination with other panels using the Datagrid as a datasource, you can enhance the experience even more.

By default, the Datagrid panel will not allow a user to edit data, but only show data like a standard visualization. To make full use of this new panel editing functionality you will need to enable the “enableDatagridEditing” feature toggle.
But for now the Datagrid Panel will support the following features in G10:

- Creating and deleting rows and columns
- Data and column header edit or delete
- Search functionality
- Column freezing
- Grid selection actions (copy/paste/delete)
- Draggable columns and rows
- Series select when pulling data from a datasource

To learn more about the Datagrid panel, please refer to the official documentation.

The list of features is already growing and of course we will look into those. So stay tuned for more features coming in the near future that will give an even better experience using the datagrid.

### Drag and Drop

Finally connecting your local data is made easier! Welcome drag & drop in Grafana!
The drag & drop functionality allows users to connect their csv, excel or numbers files by simply dragging and dropping them on a dashboard, or even into the editor directly.

Once dropped a table will be created by default containing the data that is living in the file itself.

By default, the drag & drop feature is not available out of the box. In order to utilize this functionality panel you will need to enable the `featuretogglename` feature toggle.

As of now drag & drop supports the following scenarios in G10:

- Drag & drop files on an empty dashboard
- Drag & drop files into the panel editor
- Replace files in the panel editor
- Default table panel creation

As of now the data is being stored on the dashboard json and has a 1MB size limit. Obviously it’s our mission to increase the limit without decreasing the performance in the near future.
To learn more about drag & drop, please refer to the official documentation.

The list of requests is already growing and of course we will look into those. So stay tuned for more features coming in the near future that will give an even better experience using the the drag & drop datasource.

```

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana using the exploreMixedDatasource feature toggle in all editions of Grafana._

You can now query multiple data sources in Explore. Select "Mixed" from the data source picker and specify a data source for each query.

Mixed data source in Explore is gradually rolling out to all users on Grafana Cloud. If you’re using Grafana Open Source and Enterprise, you can enable this feature using the exploreMixedDatasource feature toggle.

## Span filtering for traces

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

You can now work much more efficiently with traces that consist of a large number of spans.

The span filters exist above the trace view, and allow you to filter the spans that are shown in the trace view. The more filters you add, the more specific are the filtered spans.

Currently, you can add one or more of the following filters:

- Service name,
- Span name,
- Duration,
- Tags (which include tags, process tags, and log fields).

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `newTraceView` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

## Datagrid

> 

Author: @oscarkilhed - I want to nest your items (Datagrid and Drag and drop) under the Dashboards and visualizations heading that I've added. Any objections?

Reviewer 5: @imatwawana - sounds good (@oscarkilhed is out)

The drag & drop functionality allows users to connect their csv, excel or numbers files by simply dragging and dropping them on a dashboard, or even into the editor directly.

Once dropped a table will be created by default containing the data that is living in the file itself.

By default, the drag & drop feature is not available out of the box. In order to utilize this functionality panel you will need to enable the `featuretogglename` feature toggle.

As of now drag & drop supports the following scenarios in G10:

- Drag & drop files on an empty dashboard
- Drag & drop files into the panel editor
- Replace files in the panel editor
- Default table panel creation

As of now the data is being stored on the dashboard json and has a 1MB size limit. Obviously it’s our mission to increase the limit without decreasing the performance in the near future.
To learn more about drag & drop, please refer to the official documentation.

The list of requests is already growing and of course we will look into those. So stay tuned for more features coming in the near future that will give an even better experience using the the drag & drop datasource.

## Canvas GA

> 

Reviewer 6: Nope, that sounds good!

> ## Canvas GA
> 
> We are promoting the canvas panel out of beta and into general availability. Over the past several months we have introduced several enhancements to the panel such as the ability to draw connections between elements, the ability to add data links, and a myriad of UX improvements. We are excited to include canvas as a first class citizen in Grafana’s core panel library. To learn more about the Canvas panel, refer to [Canvas]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations/visualizations/canvas" >}}).
> 
> ## New Trend Panel
> 
> _Available in **beta** in all editions of Grafana_
> 
> We are excited to introduce a new panel that allows you to display trends where the x axis is not time. This new beta panel addresses gaps that were not solved by either the Time series or XY Chart panels.
> 
> ## Time series time region support
> 
> We have implemented support for adding time regions to the time series panel. Time regions provide a more contextualized experience, enabling you to highlight certain days of the week, such as Monday-Friday to display work weeks right alongside your data. Time regions are a useful way to highlight specific parts of a day like night, work hours, or whatever you define for each day. They allow the viewer to quickly orient themselves in parts of the day and/or ignore highlighted parts of the time series.
> 
> ## Annotation filtering
> 
> We’ve improved the way you can configure annotations by adding the possibility to apply annotations to all panels, selected panels or to select the panels by exclusion.
> 
> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-grafana-10-0-annotation-filtering.png" max-width="750px" caption="Annotation filtering" >}}
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
description: Feature and improvement highlights for Grafana v10.0
keywords:
  - grafana
  - new
  - documentation
  - '10.0'
  - release notes
title: What's new in Grafana v10.0
weight: -33
---

# What’s new in Grafana v10.0

Welcome to Grafana 10.0! Read on to learn about changes to search and navigation, dashboards and visualizations, and authentication and security. For even more detail about all the changes in this release, refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

<!-- Template below
## Feature

> [Generally available | Available in experimental/beta] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise, Cloud Free, Cloud Pro, Cloud Advanced]

Author: ```suggestion
[Generally available | Experimental | In private/public preview] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise, Cloud Free, Cloud Pro, Cloud Advanced]
```

## Correlations

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

You can now bring context from multiple data sources into the Explore experience. Correlations is an extension of our existing Data Links functionality and now enables you to link from any data source, to any data source.

Correlations enable you to seamlessly jump from one data source to another. You define relationships between your different data sources, and when Exploring simply click a button next to a related field in one data source and Grafana will run the corresponding query in the other datasource.

It's worth noting that Correlations is currently in preview. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

To try out Correlations, you'll need to enable the `correlations` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for Correlations, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

## Dashboards and visualizations

```

## Enhanced Data Source Selection Experience: Simplifying Querying for Users

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data. Our latest advancements streamline the process of selecting the ideal data source in Grafana, prioritizing recent usage and providing labels and supplementary descriptions.

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing users to quickly connect to a new one when needed. Additionally, the flow now enables quick uploading of CSV files and access to built-in data sources.

<!--
- TODO:Add screenshots
-->

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `advancedDataSourcePicker` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

> ## Dashboards and visualizations
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
description: Feature and improvement highlights for Grafana v10.0
keywords:
  - grafana
  - new
  - documentation
  - '10.0'
  - release notes
title: What's new in Grafana v10.0

> weight: -33

Author: ```suggestion
weight: -37
```

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing users to quickly connect to a new one when needed. Additionally, the flow now enables quick uploading of CSV files and access to built-in data sources.

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/screen-recording-ds-picker-whats-new-10.mp4" max-width="750px" caption="Datasource picker flow" >}}

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `advancedDataSourcePicker` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

### Public dashboards

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Public dashboards allow you to share your Grafana dashboard with anyone without requiring them to log in to Grafana. This is useful when you want to make your dashboard available to the world.

With this update, we've made the following improvements:

- The time picker and annotations can be toggled on or off from the configuration modal

> - You can see all the public dashboards from the Dashboards menu

Author: ```suggestion
- You can see a list of all your public dashboards at **Dashboards > Public dashboards**
```

- Improved UI: new modal design, paused and not found pages
- Bug fixes! E.g collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation]({{< relref "../../dashboards/dashboard-public" >}}).

### Public dashboards insights

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

The public dashboards insights provide valuable information about your public dashboard usage. You can easily access and view important metrics such as the daily query count, the number of views in the last 30 days, and the number of errors in the last 30 days.

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

### Email sharing for public dashboards

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

> Our email sharing feature allows you to easily share your public dashboards with specific individuals. When you add their email addresses, they will receive a one-time link to access the dashboard. This provides you with greater control over who can visualize your data.

Author: @juanicabanas @natellium 

```suggestion
Our email sharing feature allows you to easily share your public dashboards with specific individuals. When you add their email addresses, they will receive a one-time link to access the dashboard. This provides you with greater control over who can visualize your data.

We've also added a **Public dashboard users** tab in **Administration > Users** where you can view a list of users who have accessed your public dashboards by way of a email sharing.
```

We are excited to introduce a new panel that allows you to display trends where the x axis is not time. This new beta panel addresses gaps that were not solved by either the Time series or XY Chart panels.

### Drag and Drop spreadsheets into Grafana

_Available in Experimental in all editions of Grafana_

<!-- Oscar Kilhed -->

it's easier than ever to view local data in Grafana - welcome drag & drop!
The drag & drop functionality allows you to upload your csv, excel or numbers files by simply dragging and dropping them into the query editor of the Grafana data source.

Drag & drop feature is disabled by default. In order to use drag and drop, enable the `editPanelCSVDragAndDrop` feature toggle.

As of Grafana 10, drag & drop supports the following scenarios:

- Drag & drop files into the panel editor
- Replace files in the panel editor
- Default table panel creation

Data is being stored in the dashboard json and has a 1MB size limit. To learn more about drag & drop, please refer to the official documentation.

<!-- TODO: Add docs link above -->

### Select your data source more easily

<!-- Ivan Ortega & Natalia Bernarte -->

> _Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

Author: @ivanortegaalba - we'll want to change the note to this

```suggestion
_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._
```

> ### Select your data source more easily
> 
> <!-- Ivan Ortega & Natalia Bernarte -->
> 
> _Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
> 
> Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data. Our latest advancements streamline the process of selecting the ideal data source in Grafana, prioritizing recent usage and providing labels and supplementary descriptions.

Reviewer: @imatwawana since we will enable the toggle by default, it will be generally available. Just removing this sentence is enough for the What's new, isn't it? Thanks!

```suggestion
### Select your data source more easily

<!-- Ivan Ortega & Natalia Bernarte -->

Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data. Our latest advancements streamline the process of selecting the ideal data source in Grafana, prioritizing recent usage and providing labels and supplementary descriptions.
```

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing you to quickly connect to a new one when needed. You can also quickly upload a CSV file.

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/screen-recording-ds-picker-whats-new-10.mp4" max-width="750px" caption="Datasource picker flow" >}}

> To try it out, you'll need to enable the `advancedDataSourcePicker` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Author: this should go as well @ivanortegaalba 

```suggestion
```

We understand that this may affect some users who have relied on the ability to disable RBAC in the past. However, we believe that this change is necessary to ensure the best possible security and user experience for our community and customers.

If you have disabled RBAC for you Grafana instance, refer to our [Upgrade Guide]({{< relref "../upgrade-guide/upgrade-v10.0/index.md" >}}) to check if the change is impacting you and what you can do to mitigate any potential issues.

### SAML UI

<!-- Vardan Torosyan -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

You can now configure SAML using our new user interface, making the process easier and more convenient than ever before.
With the new user interface, you can now configure SAML without needing to restart Grafana and you can control access to the configuration UI by using [role-based access control (RBAC)]({{< relref "../administration/roles-and-permissions/access-control/" >}}). which makes the process much faster and more efficient.

> The SAML UI is available in Grafana Enterprise and Grafana Cloud Pro and Advanced. It is intuitive and user-friendly, with clear instructions and helpful prompts to guide you through the process.

Reviewer 7: @vtorosyan what do you think of telling users how to navigate to the UI in this? I tried to read this to learn where to go. Without this guidance, i went to top nav and typed in "SAML" and got no results, then i went to administration, and there is not an option for SAML... I then went to the docs, where after the "pre" section I'm presented with the path. Also noteworthy that you have that path setup as "Administration"->"Authentication"-> "SAML Configuration" but the actual tile is just "SAML".

- You can see a list of all your public dashboards at **Dashboards > Public dashboards**
- Improved UI: new modal design, paused and not found pages
- Added support for collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation]({{< relref "../../dashboards/dashboard-public" >}}).

### Public dashboards insights

<!-- Juani Cabanas & Ezequiel Victorero & Natalia Bernarte -->

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

The public dashboards insights provide valuable information about your public dashboard usage. You can easily access and view important metrics such as the daily query count, the number of views in the last 30 days, and the number of errors in the last 30 days.

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

> ### Email sharing for public dashboards

Reviewer 7: @thanos-karachalios  We may want to rephrase this to 
>Email Sharing for Dashboards

The title here could be confused that the dashboard is public, but its also shared via email. Removing public from here could clear this up. Either that or you could mention below that the dashboard is only visible by the people you share it with.

Reviewer 7: cc @evictorero

To learn more about drag & drop, please refer to the official documentation.

The list of requests is already growing and of course we will look into those. So stay tuned for more features coming in the near future that will give an even better experience using the the drag & drop datasource.

### Canvas GA

<!-- Nathan Marrs -->

We are promoting the canvas panel out of beta and into general availability. Over the past several months we have introduced several enhancements to the panel such as the ability to draw connections between elements, the ability to set the color and size of connections based on data, and the ability to add data links. We are excited to include canvas as a first class citizen in Grafana’s core panel library. To learn more about the Canvas panel, refer to [Canvas]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations/visualizations/canvas" >}}).

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-grafana-10-0-canvas-service-graph.png" max-width="750px" caption="Canvas service graph" >}}

### New Trend Panel

<!-- Nathan Marrs -->

> _Available in **beta** in all editions of Grafana_

Reviewer 7: @nmarrs we should use the term preview, not beta. cc @imatwawana See https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/19GMKK09PAFZL6G5V54RpPZrnnTLGOuREVZVhk6q6Zjk/edit#gid=776746502 for details.

We are excited to introduce a new panel that allows you to display trends where the x axis is not time. This new beta panel addresses gaps that were not solved by either the Time series or XY Chart panels.

### Time series time region support

<!-- Nathan Marrs -->

We have implemented support for adding time regions to the time series panel. Time regions provide a more contextualized experience, enabling you to highlight certain days of the week, such as Monday-Friday to display work weeks right alongside your data. Time regions are a useful way to highlight specific parts of a day like night, work hours, or whatever you define for each day. They allow the viewer to quickly orient themselves in parts of the day and/or ignore highlighted parts of the time series.

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-grafana-10-0-time-regions.png" max-width="750px" caption="Time regions" >}}

Reviewer 7: @nmarrs We could very shortly say where to find this in the configuration of a time series panel, or link to a page to learn more how to set this up for a panel. I took a while to try to find it in our 10.x test instance and I couldn't find it for a timeseries panel.

Reviewer 6: I agree on this. Time regions are set up through dashboard annotations instead of a specific panel editor option

Reviewer 6: done 👍 [commit here](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/64927/commits/bdbd773d78414759c4540e230f29ce589e1f31a7)

Notably, we've added the following new features that streamline the log context experience:

1. Log details with actions including a **Copy** button to easily copy lines and an eye icon to display only selected labels, allowing users to focus on specific information without leaving the log context panel.
2. A **Wrap Lines** toggle to automatically wrap long lines of text for easier reading and analysis of log entry context directly in log context.
3. An **Open in split view** button to execute the context query for a log entry in a split screen in the Explore view.
4. Only for Loki: A quick filter menu that lets you easily refine the context query by selecting and removing labels.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/log-context-loki-new-whats-new-10-0.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana Log Context" >}}

These improvements make working with log context in Grafana more intuitive and efficient, ultimately improving the overall user experience.

## Scenes

> <!-- Name of contributor -->

Author: ```suggestion
<!-- Dominik Prokop -->
```

To help you with dealing with potential user identity conflicts, we have built a [Grafana CLI user identity conflict resolver tool](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/12/12/guide-to-using-the-new-grafana-cli-user-identity-conflict-tool-in-grafana-9.3/) which is available since Grafana 9.3.

Note that if you are running Grafana with MySQL as a database, this change does not have any impact as MySQL users were already treated as case-insensitive.

## Tracing

### Span filtering for traces

<!-- Timur Olzhabayev -->

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

You can now work much more efficiently with traces that consist of a large number of spans.

The span filters exist above the trace view, and allow you to filter the spans that are shown in the trace view. The more filters you add, the more specific are the filtered spans.

Currently, you can add one or more of the following filters:

- Service name,
- Span name,
- Duration,
- Tags (which include tags, process tags, and log fields).

> To try it out, you'll need to enable the `newTraceView` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
To try it out, you'll need to enable the `newTraceViewHeader` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.
```

This also includes support for a new Azure API that will correlate trace ID's against all Application Insights resources that are accessible to the principal that the datasource is configured with. To support this feature a new query builder has been added with support for querying the Application Insights resource using an `Operation ID` or visualizing and filtering the data based on the event type and a subset of the properties available on the trace.

### Prometheus dashboard performance improvements

<!-- Galen Kistler -->

_This is an experimental feature_

As of Grafana 10, the Prometheus datasource supports delta (incremental) querying, in which values from data frames are cached and leveraged to modify future requests to avoid requesting duplicate values in dashboards with now-relative (i.e. any dashboard querying until "now") queries. This feature is disabled by default as it is still experimental, but can be turned on and configured in the Prometheus data source configuration.
This will reduce network load, and speed up now-relative dashboards, especially for dashboards returning lots of data.

### Phlare renamed to Grafana Pyroscope

<!-- Andrej Ocenus -->

> As a part of ongoing unification of Phlare and Pyroscope project we are renaming the Phlare data source to Grafana Pyroscope data source. This data source will support both Phlare and Pyroscope backends. Existing instances of the data source should not be affected. When creating new instance of the data source, backend type will be autodetected on the config page, or you can select it manually.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We are renaming the Phlare data source to the Grafana Pyroscope data source as part of the ongoing unification of the Phlare and Pyroscope projects. This data source will support both Phlare and Pyroscope backends. Existing instances of the data source should not be affected. When creating a new instance of the data source, the backend type will be autodetected on the config page, or you can select it manually.
```

To use it in report only mode:

- Enable `content_security_policy_report_only` in the configuration.
- Add `require-trusted-types-for 'script';` to the `content_security_policy_report_only_template`.

To use it in enforce mode:

- Enable `content_security_policy` in the configuration.
- Add `require-trusted-types-for 'script';` to the `content_security_policy_template`.

### Private data source connect

<!-- Mitch Seaman -->

_Available in Public Preview in Grafana Cloud Pro and Advanced._

Some data sources, like MySQL databases, Prometheus instances or Elasticsearch clusters, run in Private Networks, like onprem networks or virtual private clouds (VPCs) running in AWS, GCP, or Azure.

In order to query these data sources from Grafana Cloud, currently you have to open your private network to a range of IP addresses - this is a non-starter for a lot of IT Security teams. So the challenge is, how do you connect to your private data from Grafana Cloud, without exposing your network?

> The answer is Private Data Source Connect (PDC), available now in Public Preview in Grafana Cloud Pro and Advanced. PDC uses SOCKS over SSH to establish a secure connection between a lightweight PDC agent you deploy on your network and your Grafana Cloud stack. PDC keeps the network connection totally under your control. It’s easy to set up and manage, uses industry-standard security protocols, and works across public cloud vendors and a wide variety of secure networks. Learn more in our [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/data-configuration/configure-private-datasource-connect/).

Reviewer 6: Do we need to update the link to docs to be relative vs public url?

- Improved UI: new modal design, paused and not found pages
- Added support for collapsed rows, hidden queries, and zoom into panels

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation]({{< relref "../../dashboards/dashboard-public" >}}).

### Public dashboards insights

<!-- Juani Cabanas & Ezequiel Victorero & Natalia Bernarte -->

_Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

Public dashboards insights provide valuable information about your public dashboard usage. You can easily access and view important metrics such as the daily query count, the number of views in the last 30 days, and the number of errors in the last 30 days.

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

### Email sharing for public dashboards

<!-- Juani Cabanas & Ezequiel Victorero & Natalia Bernarte -->

> _Available in preview in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._
> 
> Our email sharing feature allows you to easily share your public dashboards with specific individuals. When you add their email addresses, they will receive a one-time link to access the dashboard. This provides you with greater control over who can view your public dashboards.
> 
> We've also added a **Public dashboard users** tab in **Administration > Users** where you can view a list of users who have accessed your public dashboards by way of a email sharing.
> 
> To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboardsEmailSharing` and `publicDashboards` feature toggles. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_Available in preview in Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

Our email sharing feature allows you to easily share your public dashboards and make them visible only with specific individuals. When you add their email addresses, they will receive a one-time link to access the dashboard. This provides you with greater control over who can view your public dashboards.

We've also added a **Public dashboard users** tab in **Administration > Users** where you can view a list of users who have accessed your public dashboards by way of a email sharing.

To try it out, please contact customer support.

This feature will have a cost by active users after being promoted into general availability.
```

Reviewer 4: @imatwawana please help me improve these changes:
 * Changed versions, now only available on Cloud
 * Removed any mentions of feature flags
 * Added a comment to state that only users that received an invitation will have access to the public dashboard as @timlevett suggested.
 * Explained this feature will have a cost
 
cc: @thanos-karachalios @natellium

Author: I think this is fine; I've made one small wording tweak and added "private" to the availability note, to denote that this feature is only available to invited customers.

Reviewer 4: I think this fits better with the concept of `cloud public preview` from our new [Release life cycle](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11SD-DSBtHDyXOzPVlq82cwy3XeeBhqClejUorUi86Hw/edit#) because we are announcing it publicly and it will available to anyone who requests access.

Author: Ah okay, you're right. I misunderstood.

### Case-insensitive usernames and email addresses

<!-- Vardan Torosyan -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

Usernames and email addresses are now treated as case-insensitive, which means that you will no longer need to worry about capitalization when logging in or creating an account.

From now on, whether you type your username or email address in uppercase, lowercase, or a combination of both, Grafana will treat them as the same. This will simplify the login process, reduce the risk of typos and identity conflicts when changing authentication providers.

To help you with dealing with potential user identity conflicts, we have built a [Grafana CLI user identity conflict resolver tool](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/12/12/guide-to-using-the-new-grafana-cli-user-identity-conflict-tool-in-grafana-9.3/) which is available since Grafana 9.3.

Note that if you are running Grafana with MySQL as a database, this change does not have any impact as MySQL users were already treated as case-insensitive.

## Tracing

### Span filtering for traces

<!-- Timur Olzhabayev -->

> _Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

Reviewer 9: For that phrase, I'm not entirely sure if it's correct. The [wording here](https://grafana.com/docs/release-life-cycle/) would suggest it is and it isn't, so not sure should this be updated. It's only going to be toggled on by default for hosted Grafana customers, using [release waves](https://github.com/grafana/deployment_tools/tree/master/ksonnet/environments/hosted-grafana/waves/feature-toggles#instructions) i.e. enabling by default in the canary and prod waves. This is a relatively new feature so it's not GA just yet but we would like to make it easier for customers to give us feedback.

Reviewer 8: @joey-grafana  I went through some of the other docs and found this phrasing for preview features. What do you think? Is this a public preview or a private preview? I'm guessing public because the feature will be available for hosted Grafana. I updated the wording slightly for public preview. What do you think? 

The paragraph where you mention the feature flag also talks about availability for the feature. Does the combination of that paragraph and the suggested wording below cover things?
```suggestion
_Span filtering for traces is currently in public preview. Grafana Labs offers limited support, and breaking changes might occur prior to the feature being made generally available._
```

Reviewer 9: Hi Kim, thank you. The wording here makes sense although I would imagine we would not introduce any breaking changes - more like the UI design may change. It sounds more like a public preview than a private one. I would say that you can make the call on the final wording we use together with whomever is in charge of reviewing this PR. This new feature will be available in Grafana Cloud only for the time being.

## Subfolders

<!-- Zsofia K. -->

_Available in public preview in all editions of Grafana._

You can now create subfolders in Grafana to help you better organize your dashboards and alerts. This new feature allows you to create, read, update, and delete subfolders, making it easier to sort resources by business units, departments, and teams.

You can also set up permissions using Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). Folder permissions cascade, being inherited from the parent folder, which simplifies access management.

The ability to add subfolders is currently in preview. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

To get started creating subfolders, enable the `nestedFolders` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for managing dashboards and folders, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-grafana-10.0-nested-folders-2.png" max-width="750px" caption="Subfolders in Grafana" >}}

> 

Reviewer 10: @zsofiakm 
I am not sure we can include this, unless we plan to backport https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/68124 to G10

Reviewer 11: Updated the description so that it calls out that the feature is missing.

{{% admonition type="note" %}}

If you're running Grafana with MySQL as a database, this change doesn't have any impact as MySQL users were already treated as case-insensitive.

{{% /admonition %}}

## Tracing

### Span filtering for traces

<!-- Timur Olzhabayev -->

_Available in public preview in Grafana Cloud Free, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

You can now work much more efficiently with traces that consist of a large number of spans with span filtering.

Span filters exist above the trace view and allow you to filter the spans that are shown in the trace view. The more filters you add, the more specifically span are filtered.

Currently, you can add one or more of the following filters:

- Service name
- Span name
- Duration
- Tags (which include tags, process tags, and log fields)

Span filtering is currently in preview. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

To try it out, enable the `newTraceViewHeader` feature toggle. This feature is enabled by default in Grafana Cloud.

### OpenTelemetry replacing OpenTracing

<!-- Timur Olzhabayev -->

> We've started the work to migrate to OpenTelemetry in Grafana version 8.4; now we're removing OpenTracing and, for those who still have it configured, replacing it under the hood with OpenTelemetry. These changes are backwards compatible, so you don't need to change anything the feature will continue working as it did before.

Author: ```suggestion

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

We've started the work to migrate to OpenTelemetry in Grafana version 8.4; now we're removing OpenTracing and, for those who still have it configured, replacing it under the hood with OpenTelemetry. These changes are backwards compatible, so you don't need to change anything the feature will continue working as it did before.
```

You can also set up permissions using Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). Folder permissions cascade, being inherited from the parent folder, which simplifies access management.

The ability to add subfolders is currently in preview. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

To get started creating subfolders, enable the `nestedFolders` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for managing dashboards and folders, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-grafana-10.0-nested-folders-2.png" max-width="750px" caption="Subfolders in Grafana" >}}

## Dashboards and visualizations

### The Canvas panel is GA

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

<!-- Nathan Marrs -->

> We're promoting the canvas panel out of beta and into general availability. Over the past several months we've introduced multiple enhancements to the panel such as the ability to draw connections between elements, the ability to set the color and size of connections based on data, and the ability to add data links. We're excited to include Canvas as a first class citizen in Grafana’s core panel library. To learn more about the panel, refer to our [Canvas documentation]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations/visualizations/canvas" >}}). Also, check out our [latest blog post about canvas](https://grafana.com/blog/2023/05/11/use-canvas-panels-to-customize-visualizations-in-grafana/).

Author: ```suggestion
We're promoting the canvas panel out of public preview and into general availability. Over the past several months we've introduced multiple enhancements to the panel such as the ability to draw connections between elements, the ability to set the color and size of connections based on data, and the ability to add data links. We're excited to include Canvas as a first class citizen in Grafana’s core panel library. To learn more about the panel, refer to our [Canvas documentation]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations/visualizations/canvas" >}}). Also, check out our [latest blog post about canvas](https://grafana.com/blog/2023/05/11/use-canvas-panels-to-customize-visualizations-in-grafana/).
```

<!-- Galen Kistler -->

_Experimental in Grafana Open Source._

The Prometheus data source now supports delta (incremental) querying, in which values from data frames are cached and leveraged to modify future requests to avoid requesting duplicate values in dashboards with now-relative (that is, any dashboard querying until "now") queries. This feature is disabled by default as it is still experimental, but can be enabled and configured in the Prometheus data source configuration.

This update will reduce network load, and speed up now-relative dashboards, especially for dashboards returning a lot of data.

### Phlare renamed to Grafana Pyroscope

<!-- Andrej Ocenus -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

We've renamed the Phlare data source _Grafana Pyroscope_ data source as part of the ongoing unification of the Phlare and Pyroscope projects. This data source supports both Phlare and Pyroscope backends. Existing instances of the data source should not be affected. When you create a new instance of the data source, the backend type will be autodetected on the configuration page, or you can select it manually.

### Data plane

<!-- Kyle Brandt -->

> 

Author: ```suggestion

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

```

Data types are now being defined to create a data plane layer between producers and consumers of data. By defining data types as part of Grafana's platform, plugin and application developers can use these data types to achieve more reliable interoperability across the platform.

Learn more:

- [Data plane contract - Technical specification](https://grafana.github.io/dataplane/contract/)
- [Example typed dataframes and Go lib to use them in tests](https://github.com/grafana/dataplane/tree/main/examples)
- [Go library for reading and writing dataplane data](https://github.com/grafana/dataplane/tree/main/sdata)

## Alerting

> 

Author: ```suggestion

_All Alerting features are generally available in all editions of Grafana._

```

## Correlations

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._

You can now bring context from multiple data sources into the Explore experience. Correlations is an extension of our existing Data Links functionality and now enables you to link from any data source, to any data source.

Correlations enable you to seamlessly jump from one data source to another. You define relationships between your different data sources, and when Exploring simply click a button next to a related field in one data source and Grafana will run the corresponding query in the other datasource.

It's worth noting that Correlations is currently in preview. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

To try out Correlations, you'll need to enable the `correlations` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for Correlations, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

> ## First panel creation flow

Reviewer 3: @imatwawana Could you check the content of `First panel creation flow`, `Public dashboards`, and `scenes`?

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Concepts like data sources and dashboards panels are hard to grasp and it’s a struggle to go from Grafana’s “empty state” to a working dashboard that displays data.

> The new panel creation flow greatly simplifies the data source selection step. It provides a clear overview of your available data sources and a direct link to connecting a new one, the first time you add a panel to your dashboard.

Reviewer 12: @natellium I would also add the ability to upload a csv file as well(since can be seen a source of data)

> To try it out, you'll need to enable the `datasourceOnboarding` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Reviewer 3: @ivanortegaalba Are we reusing the same feature toggle we had for the onboarding flow? Also, would be great to add a screenshot of the modal here, could you do that?

## Public dashboards

_Available in preview in all editions of Grafana._
Public dashboards allow you to share your Grafana dashboard with anyone without them having to log into Grafana. This is useful when you want to expose your dashboard to the world.

These are some of the improvements you will find in this version:

<!--

> - TODO:Improvements

Reviewer 3: @evictorero @juanicabanas can we add a list of improvements we've done since the experimental release last year?

-->

To try it out, you'll need to enable the `publicDashboards` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

> To learn more, check out our public dashboards [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/dashboard-public/?pg=blog&plcmt=body-txt).

Reviewer 3: @evictorero @juanicabanas we should review the docs, make sure they're up to date

## Scenes

> _This is an experiemental library_

Reviewer 3: @dprokop @torkelo can you review this? I also added a comment to add a link to docs and resources once we have them.

Author: @dprokop let me know that this shouldn't be nested under Dashboards so i'll leave it where it is.

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing users to quickly connect to a new one when needed. Additionally, the flow now enables quick uploading of CSV files and access to built-in data sources.

> {{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/screen-recording-ds-picker-whats-new-10.mp4" max-width="750px" caption="Datasource picker flow" >}}

Reviewer 3: @imatwawana datasource picker recording 👍

Reviewer: @natellium I'll upload a new video to the same URL, replacing the previous version, so no changes here are needed :)

With this flow, selecting a data source has been greatly simplified, providing a clear overview of available data sources and allowing you to quickly connect to a new one when needed. You can also quickly upload a CSV file.

> {{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/screen-recording-ds-picker-whats-new-10-final.mp4" max-width="750px" caption="Datasource picker flow" >}}

Reviewer 3: @ivanortegaalba Turns out we can't delete or change files, so I had to add a new one.
